[Music]
foreign Messer I'm the producer and host
of poured over and Siddhartha Mukherjee
writes extraordinary books now he also
happens to be an oncologist
and a professor
and you have two biotech companies now
which we'll get to at some point but you
also have a Pulitzer Prize let's start
with the Pulitzer Prize for emperor of
all maladies the new book is the song of
the cell the subtitle is an exploration
of medicine and the new human and I'm
delighted to see you but I gotta ask
about this new human part
um the new human is is kind of a
provocative idea in the book I was
obviously been toying with the idea of
where medicine is going in the future
and became really interested in in the
fact that you know when you read
historical documents when you read about
the first blood transfusion or when you
read about the first time someone had a
bone marrow transplant they themselves
and of course their their doctors and
families thought that what had come out
of it was a new human being when the
first IVF baby was born Louise Brown she
was broadly considered by the word a new
human being a new kind of human being
right of course there are hundreds of
thousands of babies born with IVF today
and we don't you know we sort of think
think of them as part of ourselves you
know normal process etc etc etc but I
wanted to highlight in this book which
is all about the excitement of being
able to manipulate cells now what we're
really doing is tapping into a new
conception of a human being in where we
can manipulate ourselves to cells and
this is not going to be a Sci-Fi version
this is except when I say this is not
Keanu Reeves in a black MooMoo this is
ourselves
um it is the birth of Louise Brown it is
the birth of astonishing therapies uh
which we are harnessing you know
harnessing the immune cell doing immune
transplants in which you are living with
someone else's body you may be living
with an altered version of your own body
in the case if it's your if your own
cells but the capacity to do gene
therapy plus Cell Therapy that
combination has allowed us to sort of
really begin to think of ourselves as
humans or animals or organisms where we
can manipulate fundamental units blood
the immune system bone marrow
potentially bones uh potentially organs
that potentially you know Parts the
nervous system using a combination of
um Robotics and gene therapy but
ultimate chemically which impinge on how
cells behave
and that's the new human part and I find
those new humans
incredibly exciting I find that you know
we again will think of the moment of
Louise Brown's birth
um everyone on Earth was was shattered
by her by her existence and so I find
these kinds of ideas very provocative
and that's the idea of being one of the
provocations in the book is that you
know we're making these these things and
but what we're really doing is making a
new conception of what it means to be
given and gene therapy is also been
around for a while but they seem to have
really
progressed significantly in maybe the
last decade do I have that right last
few years it sort of seems like you know
it's become much more common to hear
someone say oh well I don't have to do
radiation I don't have to do chemo I'm
actually doing something else and that
felt like sort of the last sort of
hump for those of us who don't work in
medicine it seemed like a very very big
deal one of the things also that I point
out in the book is gene therapy is of
course extraordinarily important but
before we conceive of gene therapy I
mean really gene therapy is cell therapy
a gene is a lifeless molecule a cell
enlivens the molecule
um and that's something somehow that I
think a generation of observers or
readers and writers and perhaps even
scientists have missed in order for gene
therapy to work the gene has to get to
the right cell at the right time
um in the right place and it's the cell
that's the functionary of gene therapy
without the cells now part of the reason
I think is actually there's some
something very metaphoric and iconic
about all of this and one of my
reviewers pointed this out early on you
know DNA is an iconic molecule it looks
like as someone said it looks too
perfect not to be right when they saw
the structure of DNA okay the double
helix everything about the structure of
that molecule looks too perfect not to
be right
um and of course it was eventually
proven proven rights but it's iconic we
see it you know you pass by and a
advertisement for soap and there's DNA
you pass by an advertisement for a skin
product and you know there's DNA and you
know there's a picture of DNA by it
right
um you go to the doctor's office and
there's a picture of DNA
um and you could ask yourself well
that's great but this molecule is
lifeless
um it's a molecule in a test tube just
like you know sodium bicarbonate what
brings this molecule to life and it's
it's the cell and it does so in in an
extraordinary manner in other words if
if you read the genetic code which you
and I can you could read it but you
couldn't understand it it's a cell who
understands it
and only the cell that understands it
um you could read the genetic code which
you wouldn't be able to tell me for
instance
why certain organs look the way they do
why they behave the way they do they do
why aging happens the way it happens
um why repair happens which organs are
reservoirs of stem cells which can be
genetically manipulated
um you know how the immune system really
works you could read that whole code I
mean the the code is there but we are
blind to the code only our tiniest units
are not blind to that code and so in
some ways the cell is the icon
um but it is so diverse in its function
and form that you can't put it you know
in some place you can't put it on on the
skinceutical advertisement that's also a
fascinating idea is that we've take we
we of course gravitate towards things
that are so fantastically simple but
like DNA but from that fantastically
simple code we're building these
incredibly beautiful
organisms objects that adversely occur
and there's no icon for them except for
of course the cell okay I want to build
off of something that the New Yorker
actually said in their review of emperor
of maladies which you know we're going
back a minute and a half here but this
is an enduring fault line in the nature
of medicine itself is it a future
oriented science or is it a present
rooted caring practice and it seems to
me that in your books you're doing both
of those things you're saying let's move
the needle forward let's keep the
science going forward and the therapies
and the technology but also never lose
sight of the people and that's not
always the easiest
balance yeah and I think you know that
making
making I didn't find a writer in that
genre people write medical histories
people write personal uh case histories
I didn't want to do either people write
Memoirs uh
I wanted to do all of them in the same
book
and I wanted to do that without blurring
the boundaries between any and all of
those so the book could become at Parts
a memoir at Parts a deep history at
Parts a very narrow history people are
always interested in finding out you
know why are you so interested in what I
was eating when I made the discovery I'm
always asking what did the room look
like where was it or sometimes you know
in the case of the gene the gene begins
to my visit with men to Mendel's
Monastery the emperor formalities begins
with to some extent my stay at the Dana
Farber as a fellow where I was uh
training in in cancer so
um why am I interested because those are
parts of you know I consider those parts
of living history and my extension I
consider them part of the history of of
the old I just melt them together and
you've talked about how this is going to
become a quartet emperor of malady's the
Gene and now song and the cell and I'm
wondering it seems to me having read all
three that song of the cell has a deep
connection to both of the earlier books
not just for the reasons that you were
talking about before but that blend of
the personal and the scientific and your
research
and really just wanting to be honest
about where you are and where you want
to go yeah I think that first of all the
honesty is very important
I think readers
I think one of the things is that
readers want to know uh where we are
without sort of inflating the inflating
the economy of knowledge inside uh which
is always a danger we're so excited
about what we're doing but we have a
best scientist I think as and as doctors
we have a slight tendency to inflate the
economy of our own knowledge I want the
real picture and yes they're related
they're also you know they're related in
structure they're related in form they
are related and in fact in the end uh
when the quartet is completed I think
Emperor will be lost in that quartet uh
the dean will be first the cell will be
second the third book which I haven't
written really sort of very vaguely
started thinking about will be the third
and Emperor would be the fourth I think
they have their similar instructor
they're similar form what's interesting
about them also is that they ascend in
complexity
um so the gene is the unit of life but
as I said lifeless uh the cell becomes
the fundamental unit of living
um it enlivens the gene
um cancer is the pathology of that cell
um and so it comes third or or last in
that Trio or cortex depending on on how
we think about it when did you start
writing song in the cell I had a little
Hiatus I was writing a lot for the New
Yorker and crimes magazine so I had a
little Hiatus in terms of my writing in
so let's say from 2017 to 18 and
early days of 19 I had a Hiatus
um in terms of writing a book I was
writing a lot but it wasn't writing a
book and then at some time I think early
2019 late 2018 I began to realize that
in fact this was material for a book and
that's probably when I started I don't
have an exact date yeah you write sort
of in five-year chunks it looks like
yeah I write in about four or five year
chunks yeah okay you have an act of
practice here in New York I do as an
oncologist you also teach where is this
coming in how are you making the time I
mean back in the day you used to sort of
lock yourself in the office and grab
five minutes here 10 minutes there five
minutes here is that still how you're
doing it I mean yeah I'm locking myself
in my office with longer for longer
times I mean the companies are
interesting because they're very I would
say very Cutting Edge uh one of them is
a public company called which is
trying to cure leukemia using gene
therapy and Gene editing it's really one
of the first time that we've Jean edited
this particular Gene in history
and so there's a lot of excitement but a
lot of trepidation around you know how
it'll go and things have been going very
well for for I've been involved in
a company that that is regulating diet
to manipulate cancer again a paper we
published in nature three four years ago
and then in India I've set up one of the
first car T cell company we've dosed
about 10 patients
and that's also been very exhilarating
to watch so uh but those companies sort
of run on their own once they have
founded them I just sort of keep the
lead on the research team I don't do
anything I don't any of the
administrative work I I just step away
from that and then of course you know
the the medicine goes on as it goes on
and so I find stretches of time I find
uh I'm not a very disciplined person I
just find stretches of time and then the
trouble is getting yourself into the
Zone but once I'm in the zone I can pull
out
you know 20 30 40 pages
um a day
um sometimes even more I could write an
entire section
um and that's how I've always written
that's how I always write
um I'll go back and maybe check out half
of it later but but
um but when I pick up speed just in
terms of putting words on the page I put
words on the page and you've said in
earlier interviews too that you don't
really differentiate between your work
as a doctor and your work as a writer
and I'd really like to take a minute and
explore that idea for a second I mean I
I think at a very base level I
understand what you're saying no I think
I mean there's several ways that I've
come to that idea one of them is I use
like like many people I use writing to
think and I use diagrams and writing to
get it together to think um it is my
mechanism of of How to Think Through
problems
um think through medicine think so
that's the that's the narrow sense with
a broader sense I also use it to think
about not just one case or this
particular case I use it to think about
the landscape of of medicine doctors
often don't ask questions like where are
we now and where are we going
um they're sort of you know we're so
nose to the ground
um which is a good thing you don't want
your doctor to be the local philosopher
um but but we're so nose to the ground
that we often sort of forget the idea
that there's a journey here and it's a
remarkable Journey one of the most
remarkable Journeys in intellectual
history and so
um you know I I just think of the
landscape where is the landscape where
are we going that that's why I get this
question of you know human and new human
what is you know what are the limits and
what are the implications for all of
this so obviously there's some
separation between my writing life and
my my medical life but I'm on the page
I'm on the page as a doctor that makes a
big difference again so where are we now
well first of all we're learning very
broadly speaking how an organism is
built
um how an organism uh repairs itself
from injury
and how an organism uh performs
Rejuvenation over time and Longevity
um I'll say that's a very very broad
landscape view of where we are
um cells are the functionaries in all of
this cells are reading the genetic code
and then converting the genetic code
into function once we figured out figure
out those three how we're built
uh how we repair ourselves and how we
rejuvenate ourselves
and their flip sides so what makes that
building go wrong what makes
um the repair go wrong and you know when
you when you cannot rejuvenate or
rejuvenate too much
um you get cancer or or death from
degenerative diseases so so we're trying
to see look at both the uh building and
the the destruction the pathology that
accompanies when those processes go
wrong
um I think once we understand them
relatively deeply they don't have to the
fullest depth the question that we're
asking and we're beginning to ask is
well okay we understand this can we
change it
um can we change the process and can we
change it deliberately safely what are
the limits of that safety
um and and how do we control
um those changes
um so for instance we're beginning to
work with T cells in a way that you know
didn't exist in my in at least in my
prior lifetime we're beginning to work
with the bone marrow for instance at War
we are changing the bone marrow
um in a way that was impossible to
imagine so it's the combination of this
knowledge of these sort of very uh three
broad categories combined with cell
manipulation and genetic manipulation
cell manipulation meaning isolation of
cells identification of cell type and
and genetic manipulation of that cell
type and then beginning to create you
know build up build up organs build up
organ systems build up
you know reboot the immune system cure
uh really deadly diseases like cancer
moving into diseases like type 1
diabetes we're trying to transplant
um you know pancreatic beta cells that
they'll insulin so that you don't need
to inject yourself every day every day
um this is part of where we are yep and
the book is where we're going exactly so
so
um as we find out more and more about
these three processes we'll find out
more and more about where we're going
and sometimes in in some cases we're
sort of almost halfway there in other
cases where a quarter of the way there
and yet other cases you know we are far
from there the March is going on we're
in the middle of it you know when you
talk about Gene editing and gene
splicing and people have very big
feelings on
coming from different angles on on it
and it does it still sounds a little
science fictiony even though you're a
doctor and you've been practicing for a
number of years and then you've also got
this sort of little Specter of eugenics
in the background and I mean you talk
about both of these things in the book
and and it really is like how do we
put the science first I mean you talk
about science being the search for truth
and how exciting it is to be on the
frontier of creating a new medicine I
mean these are all important things but
we don't always have the greatest track
record as humans when it comes to
applying these things that's something
that scientists need to realize I mean
that was in some ways very Central to
the Gene and is somewhat Central to this
book there's no regulatory Authority
that's going to tell us what to do and
how to do it when to do it um you know
if you're living in China or in Russia
or in somewhere else different rules
apply
um
but I think the the idea of eugenics is
very much uh part of it I mean the hard
line that that people have drawn so far
is you know what I call the line of
suffering um is it suffering it should
meet an unmet need in other words it
should meet the unmet need of suffering
and then have have safety
um and a track record of safety then
there are you know as you know they're
complicated that Things become in the
real weeds Things become complicated
there's a very interesting section in
this book where you know the American
Society for Gynecology meets and says
infertility isn't suffering we've had
infantry for you know the beginning of
human history
um so it's not suffering whereas
obviously
um I don't think that would be the
consensus today therefore they said IVF
shouldn't be treatment
um if you're not treating what are you
treating what is the medical condition
you're treating it rings very oddly
today because we are so on the other
side of that uh it seems like an absurd
statement but at that at its time it was
not considered absurd lots of people
really believed it
um and so that's an example of how sort
of even though we can be relatively uh
strict and honest about
um you know what suffering means and how
we can we can
handle it
um I think that that the the the term
itself is slippery and moves along and
often can't uh can't we just spin down
yeah you also tell a personal story
about a bout of depression you had in
17.
and you're talking to an old friend and
colleague Paul greengard
who had a really interesting way of
looking at depression and I just want to
raise it here because again there are
some people who are just like well it's
brain chemistry he called depression a
slow brain problem and then the two of
you sort of dissect it over lunch can we
go there for a second can we talk about
Paul and his
[Music]
um unfortunately died uh in 2019 I think
uh but Paul was it was an immense figure
in his field a towering scientist uh
when he won the Nobel Prize in 2000 for
physiology and medicine and that Nobel
Prize is really important in our
understanding of diseases like
depression
um for years and years so we have to go
back a little bit
um
so the nervous system obviously is made
of neurons nerve cells and
um there were classic experiments
performed in the 1950s in which they
solved how nerve cells talk to each
other that mechanism of talking was
um an electrical impulse moves through a
nerve cell and we can talk separately
about how that exactly that happens
you can imagine an electrical impulse
that moves to a nerve cell well it
reaches the end of a nerve cell it
causes the release of chemicals called
called neurotransmitters so those
chemicals are like serotonin uh dopamine
a chemical called Gaba many others the
whole families have done those chemicals
then
go and go into this little tiny little
cleft little space between the two
neurons one wire just finished they go
to that space in between the Y2 wires
and then they restart the electrical
impulse in the second wire
um they may be inhibitory they may be
excitatory but they do something to the
second wire and change its electrical
transmission
um and this process occurs in about a
millisecond and this is the so-called
electrical grain
um and it was very soon called the fast
brain because it the whole process
occurred so quickly so this was the
conception of the brain as a series of
wires with this chemical
neurotransmitter thrown in the middle
but nonetheless a series of wires and
the idea was that if you solve the black
box of wires we'd solve all the problems
and they our understanding of the brain
so Consciousness sentience sensation
um you know all these other memory all
of these other features of the brain
would be solved by understanding the
wired brain the box of wires and as I
said there's a chemical thrown in the
middle from that emerged a theory of
depression was which was that
chemical thrown in the middle serotonin
there wasn't enough of it
and therefore if you somehow could
increase that chemical you would relieve
or alleviate depression I I call this
the the loudspeaker Theory so it's
because you know it's like you know
you've got two electrical wires
um but the loudspeaker between them or
the volume of transmission between them
isn't high enough it's not sparking
enough uh signal in the in the second
neuron the second electrical wire and if
you could just make it a little bit
louder the second wire would become here
and could now hear it
um and it would resume normally and so
in the 1970s and 80s many drugs Prozac
and Paxil and Other Drugs were invented
these are serotonin reuptake inhibitors
ssris
the bottom line is what they do is they
increase the level of serotonin in your
brain and the idea was that was one once
you've restored the in if you've
increased the amount then the electrical
grain will now restart or re-spark in
its normal process and as it resparks
your depression will heal that happens
in some cases but the responses were far
from predictable and far from Universal
um whole comes in here at around the 80s
and 90s and he says wait a second
there's a different kind of transmission
going on in the brain and it's very
important this different kind of
transmission the brain is not just a
bunch of electrical wires the brain is
also a site for biochemical reactions
within the cell so that impulse from one
cell appears down and binds to The
receptors in the in the second neuron in
the second electrical wire it's not like
just sparking off another electrical
signal what it's doing is it's changing
fundamental biochemical metabolic
physiologic features of the second wire
and so don't think of the brain as a box
of wires it is also a site of
biochemical reactions it's a chemical
his idea was that it's these second it's
this slow transmission which occurs on
the orders of seconds if not days
changing the electrical wire that is
recipient end that really are
responsible for many properties of the
brain and most importantly are
dysfunctional in diseases such as
depression and schizophrenia and all to
the to the end of his life believe that
Depression was not just a serotonin you
know not enough serotonin problem that
it was actually changed in the slow
brain changes in the biochemical
Pathways that ultimately cause the
smooth Disorder so that's that's sort of
the big distinction but that also leads
you to a Carl Sandberg poem I mean this
is something you do throughout all of
the books that you have as many literary
references as you do medical references
it's a really great Sandberg piece that
you pull but zadie Smith shows up in
this book Iris Murdock
shows up in the new book and so your
influencers are so obviously coming from
every piece of your life
but can we talk about the writers for a
second the writers who helped shape you
because you've said it before that I
learned to write by reading and then
when I say write I mean write really
beautiful smart books not just you know
well the first thing I'll say is that uh
whenever I have a conversation with
someone I I I mean they know that I'm
not I'm a writer and I I might be having
a scientific conversation and I'll say
to them just remember
nothing is really off the books
in other words would you say something
to me if if it happens to catch some
thread that is deep
um that will probably end up in a book
somewhere you know you may be anonymized
the phrase may be changed around but
it'll end up somewhere it's going to
become part of the broader thinking
um the other question that people ask me
is is it I find a little annoying but uh
but it's important to answer they you
know do write a book and then go
backwards and find poems and fit them in
and that's obviously not the case no no
but what I do is when I'm writing so if
I'm writing this this piece on
depression and
um I'm sitting there and remembering and
I often just know the scratch of the
phone I have to look up the actual words
on the internet I memorize a thousand of
them
um I'll know the scratch of a poem and
I'll say oh you know there's there's
there was something so beautiful in that
image
of of this cat who sits quietly on
launched feet and won't go on and the
reason I think of this is that
um I used to have a cat now I have a dog
but often in the morning I'll get up
with the feeling of of extreme chest
heaviness
um and it's because one of those two
animals has is sitting on my chest
um and so I had this image and I
couldn't shake the image of like some
kind of organic animal sitting on the my
mood not letting it rise like pressing
it down and that's how the Sandberg
Point came in
um zadie is had has been an old friend
of my wife's
um
and has written about my wife
um so I've you know I read zadie's first
book long before I even knew her but I
love zadie as an essayist and there was
something about reading way back when I
was reading about that I said essay that
this is an essay that writes about
Dickens and about the ability so it's
actually very powerful essay it's about
whether or not we can trans you know
whether whether or not we can transform
ourselves into other characters very
radical essay for it particularly for
this time there's a when there's a very
when there's a strong question about who
can write about what you know very
controversial tough topics
um and there's been a lot of
conversation about this
zadie takes up this idea of Charles
Dickens arriving about a little now
um and she says and I found it very
interesting she says look you know the
there's an infinitude of curiosity in
that moment it's not like Charles
Dickens
Fields as if he's sort of schizophrenic
it's the he has an infinitude of
curiosity in that moment
and
um and when I when I read that I said
you know that's very interesting because
it's a little bit like science because
in my lab there's no uh hard and fast
rule that we cannot work on something
um and the analogy isn't perfect you
know Labs don't have the same sense of
identity they don't have the same
history and history is not loaded etc
etc but what I found interesting is this
idea of a person Charles Dickens being
surrounded by all the characters he's
created
and in the lab and sometimes I think oh
you know I'm sitting there surrounded by
all the experiments that I've created
some in blood some in leukemia some in
metabolism some in
um you know we study one of the things
that I you know is in the book is that
we study bone
and we've discovered many many things
about going that have nothing to do with
blood or cancer or me being an
oncologist it's just that we went down
that rabbit hole and found really
incredible things about about bone and
Bone biology so
um so therefore you know that image from
zadie was very very haunting and came
into the book
um what other influences I mean they're
quite stands some of them are standard
you know classical Victorian case
studies that I learned how to think
about or think through
via people like Oliver Sacks uh you know
how to strip string a narrative together
chronologics how to be in the place that
I learned from Richard Rhodes
um the making of the atomic bomb
um you know actually the one day's books
obviously about sort of humanizing
um case histories and making them making
them present Jenny even sometimes
satiric and absurd sense of humor I
don't know I can keep quoting you know
non-scientific and literary references
which which come into the book and I
think it's important too because I mean
what you're trying to do is bring people
to a subject that not everyone is always
rushing to I mean I remember the first
time I read Emperor maladies and I
thought wait a minute who is this guy
and what's he doing and I knew you were
a doctor and I knew I wanted to read the
book because I'd heard so many good
things from wildly different people in
my life saying oh have you read this
have you read this and I sat down and I
probably read it pretty quickly I do
remember because you're a little bit of
a page Turner for a science writer and I
just remember thinking oh
I don't think I've ever seen anything
like this before and I've been a
Bookseller for a really long time and it
was just it was one of those moments
where it's like and then the gene came
and I was like okay
okay I'll follow you down this Rabbit
Hole too and here we are
with song in the cell and I don't think
you can have what you do if you aren't
pulling influences from disparate spaces
I don't I don't think it would be a very
boring book right it's also an
experimental book in terms of structure
you know usually
people write books in
chronologically you know this happened
and that happened and then she did this
and then this that's a story and it's a
big friend it's a great friend in terms
of writing a book
um in the song I said I was starting at
chronological and certainly the first
few chapters are and then I take this I
think a weird and radical departure and
I say well you know what every chapter
is going to be a cell I was struggling
and struggling and struggling to put it
all sort of into one chronological
basket historical basket and I said one
day I woke up and I was like you know
what really this book wants to be this
book wants to reflect that the
development or the history of Cell
Biology is not is a non-chronological
history by itself lots of things are
happening at the same time so you can't
say you know you'll be in 10 places at
the same time following 10 different
leads but the body
is a separate unit of organization
the body has organs and systems and
cells and those cells perform separate
functions so I said well what if each
chapter is a cell let's just try it on
and that's why I wrote the first uh a
chapter on IVF called the dividing cell
and all of a sudden I was that that
feels very natural because you then go
on from the dividing cell to another
functional property and in the end you
get a sense of all of sort of how all of
these functional properties build up to
create
humans and and if their function goes
wrong you get disease one of the things
you talk about too though you needed to
add a little new material that you
hadn't quite planned on because you said
there's no way to write about the cell
if you're not going to write about covid
I had already started the book there's
quite a lot that had gone into it
um and then
the pandemic began to Wildfire its way
through the world
and I was basically homebound for a
while
um I would see some patients but you
know out of in a very limited capacity
and this was when it was the the worst
throws of the pandemic and then I began
to realize that even the pandemic is
really
kind of extrapolation of Cell Biology
you can't think of the pandemic outside
psychology
and so we began to realize that that is
really the way that cell biology you
know the and it's also as I said as I
say in the book also a very humbling
moment because it was all of a sudden we
realized that aspects of cell bodies
that we don't even know I don't know how
many people know this but
but one reason not the only reason the
one reason that
um young men were previously healthy
have had such a severe reaction to covet
or other psychoscope to the virus is
because they already had a pre-existing
unknown un recognized autoimmune disease
which had really inactivated one of the
ways that the body responds to viruses
and they had gone long their lives
perfectly normal nothing abnormal about
their lives but this virus all of a
sudden exposed the idea that that was
the problem that autoimmune disease was
the problem
and we wouldn't have even known that it
was an immune problem until we dissected
the cell biology and the immune biology
of our human responses to Sarasota yeah
when it comes to studying science and
being involved
in The Sciences I think everyone there
is clear that you know like you said you
don't always know but the whole point is
to find out
it's harder to follow science sometimes
when you're not
in the thick of it and it's harder to
understand that it is a little bit of a
moving Target you have to make educated
guesses to get to the next step and
sometimes it really works and sometimes
it doesn't but what's the biggest lesson
you took away from song in the cell how
did writing this book change you I think
the biggest lesson was to understand
again I think that's why the code
chapter was is very crucial it was to
understand
again the where what the landscape looks
like you know
build repair rejuvenate
um but how much is now unknown unknown
you know improbialities in some ways was
a sobering book
um the gene was a book where you you
felt a sense of I would say a mixture of
excitement but also of anticipation
about the future
um I think this book you feel you feel
the excitement but you also feel as if
you know you don't know what you don't
know
um so in in some some sense I think this
book is a humbling book
um it's a book about sort of realizing
that that we need to understand as as I
say in the last chapter
just a cell in isolation but the cell in
its context at the sell these what I
call the Ecology of the cell and it's
only when you see and understand that
ecology is when you really begin to
figure out how you know how things work
and why things work the way they do you
know all books have moves and I think
the mood this book is exactly that
um there's a kind of there's a sense of
excitement about what's being done but
there's also a sense of humility about
sort of you know how much we don't know
you know the one thing I can't really
stress enough I know you're talking
about humility in Song of the cell but
it's also it's an incredibly hopeful
book I mean you're standing on the
precipice of the future and you're
managing it in a way that not everyone
gets to and not everyone gets to see so
can we just talk about that for a second
because I think it's really important
for people to understand that like the
future is here yeah the future is here
in the future is ours and it's just you
know what was to me the most interesting
thing about writing this book was the
sense of excitement yeah yeah and and
being there and doing this you know
looking down there's so much of this
book which is about looking uh you keep
looking down microscopes looking down
tunnels looking at lenses looking at
every
and that looking is also of course
looking into the future
um it takes on an abstract form a
metaphorical form so I just you know I
found writing this book
intensely exciting
um and and I kept saying why hasn't
anyone written this book before
um
obviously you know if people write
different books but this is a this is a
moment you know I met Emily Whitehead
the one of the first survivors of T-cell
therapy in in Pennsylvania and I was
like
again it was it was it was sort of my
sort of like my Louise Brown moment uh
in which I said you know you're alive
because someone some group of scientists
working over decades really figured out
what a T-cell was figured out how to
take a T-cell out of the body
weaponize it with a gene therapy uh
weapon basically grow those T cells in a
Petri dish in a laboratory in a sterile
manner Infuse them back into your body
and make sure that the T cells would eat
the cancer not eat eat the rest of you
that's all you now each step seems like
a throwaway line but it's is like was
dug out of hard cold Earths in terms of
science but also is the is so exciting
uh we're talking about real real
Monumental things
uh Monumental ways to change the body
Monumental ways to as I said make new
humans and so
I guess I just wanted to convey that
excitement uh that I hope you know sort
of palpates to the whole book yeah you
need story to make the science sing yeah
that's really all it comes down to so
like the song of itself exactly
Siddhartha Mukherjee thank you so much
song of the cell is out now along with
of course Gene and Emperor of all
maladies thanks again
[Music]
hello readers it's time for another TBR
top off where we recommend books to pick
up when you stop in for your copy of the
song of the cell I'm Mark and I'm coming
to you for my Barnes Noble store in
Cincinnati Ohio
Madison I'm coming to you from my store
in Indianapolis uh we've got a couple of
great books to cover today Madison if
you don't mind I'll jump right in yeah
so I chose a fantastic fantastic book
called mountains Beyond mountains by
Tracy Kidder this is a remarkable and
inspiring story about Dr Paul Farmer
this man this extraordinary glorious
wonderful man
um about 40 years ago uh he established
a health clinic in one of the poorest
parts of Haiti he specialized in
particular diseases like tuberculosis
and AIDS his work extended through Haiti
reached through Peru and even as far as
Russia and all of this good work is
still felt today and it stems from the
mind and heart and philosophies of this
beautiful beautiful man he believed that
hard work and a kind heart were the
first necessary components for healing
secondly was access and resources and he
strove every moment of his life to
achieve all of those pieces his
commitment and his courage are boundless
and his empathy should be forever
recognized and emulated and celebrated
sadly Dr Farmer died earlier this year
but his legacy lives on in this book and
in the thousands of lives that he helped
to heal if you need a great pick-me-up
please check out mountains Beyond
mountains by Tracy Kidder
Madison what do you have for us I think
what I want to point out first is that
what our books have in common is kind of
like the heart that's at the center of
all this good work that all these like
doctors surgeons are doing
um which is why I chose the face maker
by Lindsay Fitz Harris it was
recommended to me by our Bookseller
Heidi here at our River Crossing store
and it is about the surgeon Harold
Gillies who was the at the foundation of
the plastic surgery movement when we
think of plastic surgery today you think
more like a vanity people getting all
sorts of like trying to make the
wrinkles go away off your face maybe a
nose job because you had a bad fall when
you were a child all these different
things but I think what's wonderful
about this book is that you actually get
into the history and how it started kind
of wasn't that way at all it all was
centered around the first world war and
these soldiers who came back for more
and needed like facial reconstruction
surgery so what Gillies did was kind of
give this Spirit hope and Humanity back
to these soldiers so what he did when he
got his victims who were badly burned
missing pieces of their faces he
reconstructed it for them so Society no
longer saw them as monsters but the
heroes they deserve to be and I think
that is such an important message to
spread and something you might not think
about when you think of plastic surgery
today which is why I think the pacemaker
by Lindsey fitzharis is such an
interesting and inspiring read when you
get down to it fantastic pick as always
well that is all we have for today thank
you so much for tuning in to portover
please make sure to give us a rating And
subscribe so you never miss an episode
you can follow us at Barnes Noble pretty
simple I'm Mark you can follow my home
store at bien Westchester and I'm
Madison you can follow my home store at
vegan River Crossing
thanks everybody happy reading happy
reading bye-bye
Port over is a Barnes Noble production
the show is available on Apple Spotify
and Stitcher please rate and review us
wherever you listen to podcasts
[Music]